mnonuc'rlon. - 17

boles which disfigure his panegyrice of Octavian and
Dolabella, when we recollect that the old man’s tongue
was the only power which held together the deeply anta—
gonistic and profoundly selfish generals who affected to
be fighting Antony. Plancus in particular seems to have
been really impressed, and to have shown more loyalty to
the Republican party than his friends had expected. No
mere statesman could have saved the Republic‚ but Cicero
made a good fight for it. Traitors, like Asinius Pollio, ,

. · found it convenient to blacken his death with the charge

of cowardice, but sober judges, like Livy, judged differ-
ently. CowardiCe is not the fault which we should detect
in it. Gazing fixedly at his murderers, and holding his
chin after his usual fashion with one hand. he stret-ebed
out his neck for the axes, saying: “Let me die in the
country I have so often saved.” In the hour of death as
throughout life egotism and patriotism were strangely

blended.
3.

The scornful criticisms of Mommsen· on Cicero's cha-
racter are not original. Geminus Varius in Seneca's
“ Suasoriae ’³3⁴ is represented as saying ι “ I hope to per-
suade my friend Cicero to choose life : as for his pompous

- phrase ‘ no death is premature for him who has been

 

consul, nor deplorable to him who is a philosopher‚' it
does not influence me z I know the man well ε he will ac—
cept slavery : his neck is well worn with the chain ε Pom-
peius and Caesar both broke him in : he is an old servant
of the house ι he will say, ‘ I have lived long enough for

u suasoria vl.
2 γ

